In philosophy the concept of knowledge is analysed in relation to the notion of
justified true belief. Here a belief is a proposition and so knowledge is some
type of function of a proposition, that is a proposition might be knowledge or
it might not be.

Outside the confines of epistemology the idea of knowing is less strict and is
instead a part of complex language games. In the psychological sciences there
is a distinction between declarative and procedural knowledge, which has an
equivalent is the philosophical distinction, going back to Aristoteles, between
episteme and techné, where the focus of epistemology is on the former.

It is difficult to understand the first type of knowledge separately from language
which enables the declaration. In philsophy, a proposition is fundamentally a
sentence however complex, often encoded in a formal logic.

It might be argued from a psychological perspective, that declarative knowledge
is not a set of sentences but that an individual has a base of knowledge concerning
some topic or situation and that from this base the individual is able to express a wide
set of sentences. Because there are multiple ways of saying the same thing the
actual linguistic sentences should be regarded as secondary to the structure which
enables their production.

Taking this simple model of a structure which enables production of sentences of
knowledge is seems hard to deny, that in humans, memory is a necessary condition
for this structure. Let us look first at knowledge based on experience.

The subject has an experience at day 1. On the corner of this and this street he
sees a large sign saying that a supermarket has opened. For psychological
reasons the person trusts the advertisement. At day 2 the individual goes to the
supermarket on the corner and buys groceries. At time 3 a psychologist-philosoper,
knowing that there is supermarket on the corner, tests his knowledge: "Is there a
supermarket at the intersection this and this road?" and the person answers:
"Yes, there is." When the subject is asked why they answered yes rather than no,
they say "I have been there yesterday." If the person had not been there yesterday,
they would still say yes on the basis of seeing the sign. When challenged their
belief would not be as strong as if they had been there. If they had been there and
asked how sure, they would not bet all their money on it, because they could imagine
even if unlikely, the supermarket could have closed down already or been bombed and
many other cases. This shows that even if the belief is based on particular experience
it is connected to other psychological aspects such as trust in signs, notions of
deception, common sense, abilities to imagine alternatives etcetera.

Suppose day 1 and day 2 happened and that the subject never had any explicit thoughts
such as "Okay, there is a supermarket which has opened" or "I am going to the supermarket"
and never mentioned the supermarket to anyone on these 2 days. It might be argued that
it would not be possible form the psychological intention of going to the supermarket
without a linguistic thought equivalent to "I am going to the supermarket", still it
seems at least as reasonable that some people could see that their fridge was empty
have an image in their head of the supermarket and start going there. This would mean
that the intention and behavior of going to the supermarket happens still happens
by the cortex having abstract representations of the environment but not necessarily
with sentences. In this way it is analagous to saying that the person is able to use
the underlying knowledge base to guide action without needing to produce explicit
linguistic thought.

Now making these assumptions about day 1 and day 2 and taking this model of cognition
and behavior would be still on day 3, if the supermarket is indeed still going fine,
say that the person has knowledge that "A supermarket has opened on the corner of this
and this street"? We would perhaps think that it is weird to formulate the knowledge
using so specific a sentence, and say that the subject has the potential of uttering
this sentence or that given that he was asked whether this sentence is true he would
agree with a high level of confidence. Without formulating in the same way, most would
probably agree with the model of an underlying knowledge base regarding some supermarket
as an instance of a more general perhaps fuzzy notion of supermarkets and shops and
some spatial map of the environment and ability to find a path to this place given
the need etc. That is, there is some representation of this knowledge in brain, some
of it in the actual structure of the neurons, axons and dendrites some part of it
only present as a potential given some stimulus, meaning that the psychological
distinction between recognition and recall also has a neural basis. All of this is
saying that even if we assume that the person lost all linguistic capabilities, by
damaging some areas of the brain, we would still be willing, in some circumstances to
regard them as having knowledge.

The reason for going through this spectacle is to have a sufficient basis for the
notion that knowledge is not based on language, propositions and declaration, and
explore the notion of knowledge from another angle.

For a system to know it has to hold memory. However, it is not clear that memory is
a property which should be attributed to all systems.

Suppose that we have a system with an input signal and the state of the system changes
on the basis of this signal. In many cases such automata will have states which provide
information about about previous patterns in the signal. Does this mean that such a
system knows that a specific pattern has occured previously? Just because a pool table's
current state is the causal result of previous actions by the players, does the system
know the previous actions? 